We are talking about the freeway system. And I
bound again in a few licks here about signing and
about the creation of anxiety levels. And I wanted
to mention for the record the difference,
apparent difference, not just because I'm a
planner, but I think just because I'm a motorist,
in going from, say, a Houston to a San Diego. and
using the freeway systems there in the two cities,
or even Los Angeles. In Los Angeles, for example,
the signing is very anticipatable in the sense
that each exit is announced three times. And the
first time it's announced, it's at the bottom. The
second time, it's at the middle. And then when you,
the next time you are at the exit, it's at the top.
And all exits are from the right hand lane unless it
has been physically impossible because of
historic problems to do otherwise and left hand
exits are necessitated but it's a pattern that's
exhibited all over the state of California and you
come to expect that so you know you have three
warnings before you ever have to make your
maneuver and not only that but the signs are
illuminated at night in all cases and the splits
for off-ramps and so forth are eliminated before
you get to them, and the signs are placed well in
advance so that you don't have to make an instant
judgment at the moment of truth before you make
your action maneuver. And I believe that,
personally, this creates a very low anxiety level
and it contributes to the safety of the use of the
freeway system. There's one other thing I'd like
to mention in connection with freeway design in
urban areas, and that is its appearance in terms of
relationship between man-made construction and
the use of plant materials. Of course, California
is blessed with a certain climate that enables
things to stay green and flowering throughout the
year, at least in the southern part of the state.
But even in the northern part of the state, where
they have frosts and snow and so forth, there is an
attempt made to put plant materials there that are
native, require low maintenance, and that
contribute to a kind of a softness of the sometimes
necessarily harsh man-made constructions in
terms of cuts and bridge structures and so forth.
And I really would like to see something done more
along those lines throughout Texas, but
particularly in the urban areas such as Houston.
Well, I think we'll see those things. I think with
reference to the signing, I'm surprised. note
there's any great difference because the
interstate system has the one set of design
standards that apply nationwide. Presumably.
Presumably and certainly I would look for uniform
design standards throughout a state and
apparently you've noted difference in the
signing of Houston and Dallas and other Texas
cities so apparently there's more freedom left to
the local district offices within the State
Highway Department, and I'm aware of it. Of
course, it's well to remember that when the
interstate highway system had its beginnings,
the choice of the State Highway Commission in
Texas was to concentrate in the urban areas first,
rather than, say, city or states like Oklahoma and
Florida that I'm familiar with where they
immediately moved into the rural areas because
they could get more miles faster, and quite
frankly, needed them more. Their roads built in
the 30s were really frightful to take care of the
traffic of the early 50s. So those states that had
poor highways moved into the rural areas. Texas,
with a very excellent highway department over the
years, had a very excellent rural system, and they
immediately moved into the urban areas. And in
each urban area, as I understand it, is
established an expressway office to design and
coordinate construction, the awarding of
contracts, et cetera, inspections. For the, I
think, one in Dallas, one in Fort Worth, one in
Austin, one in San Antonio, one in Houston. I think
the urban expressway office in Houston is of those
state highway offices. But even so, I thought they
had a higher level of uniformity than they do. Let
me give you another example. The freeway bypass
for Bryan and College Station has on and off ramps,
which by the admission of some people in the Texas
Transportation Institute are a total disaster.
Which makes it even worse is the fact that the local
highway district engineers don't realize that
there's any need for completely rebuilding them.
Is College Station in District 12 operates out
of...
Okay, now let's proceed on, Roscoe, to...
Do you perceive any administrative change within
the planning department?
That's 11. I don't see any at this time. I'm not
contemplating making any internal changes
within the department. Has the city, since you've
been the planning director, made use of the work of
planning consultants?
Very seldom. We had a planning consultant
Actually, an architecture firm in the
preparation of community shelters. Master plan,
which was a federally funded project. And the
growth options project in which Rice Center came
in. But most of the planning work the department
over the years has been with personnel at the
department. OK. these influences that are listed
here political religious ethnic geographic
sociological economic and military I think we've
more or less covered as we've been going along but
the city has now the problem of having expanded
geographically over so much area 525 some square
miles I believe that
The view now, particularly in view of energy
concerns, is turning inward again. And there has
been a lot of discussion about the third ward and
the role of the third ward and the fourth ward in the
city. Would you care to comment on that or any
expansion of this concept? Well, certainly, the
aging of housing in neighborhoods
is becoming a much greater problem than it was say
10 years ago and receiving a much higher level of
attention both in cap improvements and planning
efforts and policy concerns.
I would hesitate to say that there is a great
movement into the central city of course we're
currently under a sur moratorium that would
restrict at least some of the developers and
landowners feel like they're restricted from
creating as high a density of developments as they
would like when those restrictions are lifted
with completion of the north east plant we
probably will see more density development in the
eastern half of downtown. The western half, I'm
sorry, where there is a viable market for more
dense housing. In the eastern half, the growth
options study indicated very few pressures for
extensive growth and development quite contrary
there is need for a lot of revitalization and a lot
of upgrading of housing it's going to be hard to
come by at the same time the older areas on the east
half represent a very good stock of housing in many
respects Houston has facetiously had the wisdom
to build in this century instead of the previous
one. Therefore, we are not plagued with six-story
cold-water tenement flats as New York and
Chicago. We're not faced with the high-density
areas that have become slums that were built in the
1880s and such. The close-in areas of Houston are
suburban in character. which means that there's a
lot of close in areas that, given a stabilized
confidence in these areas, can remain as good
housing areas for many, many years. There's been a
lot of private rehabbing going on in Houston, as I
understand it. Is this making very much of an
impact on the whole housing stock? I think it would
be hard to find in the statistics. There's no
question what old houses have been refurbished,
but I think these
are very few compared to the totality of the
housing stock. But there is definitely
remodeling going on, rehabilitation going on in
many areas close in. And to some extent, like in, as
in other cities, that the very success of the
program, or I really can't call it program, the
very success of the many individual investors,
either as homeowners or as literally speculative
investors in remodeling and reconditioning
houses, has tended to drive the property up. The
desire of people to live close in with the energy
prices and traffic congestion is driving the
prices up to where there's a limit to how the market
that can afford some of
the close in areas. You are the director of a large
planning agency and as such you are of course
responsible for the performance of the
professional planners on your staff and in that
respect you are of course concerned about the
quality of planning education that these
individuals receive before they come to you.
In taking a look at perhaps your own experience
with planning education and what's happened
subsequently Your thoughts on this would be
appreciated.
Well,
we were just talking between the tapes there on
some aspects of this. I shared with you some of the
questioning perhaps that the older one gets, the
more nostalgic they get about their own education
and the days that they spend at the university,
particularly in graduate work, become a sort of
golden age.
Certainly, the late 40s and 50s, for planning
education, there was a very limited number of
planning schools. a very limited number of
planning students, a very lucrative expanding
job market for planners, and I think the quality of
planning education during those days was really
at a very high level. The faculty members tended to
be practitioners, very successful in the
planning field, and really almost with a sense of
dedication that they gave up their practice and
came back to school. And I think in the 60s, with the
tremendous expansion of the number of students,
with the somewhat artificial encouragement for
graduate work in planning, as indeed graduate
work in all areas is a means of avoiding the draft, I
can't help but feel that the 60s saw a decline in,
certainly, scholarship. A decline in
not only the scholarship, but in the direction
that education was heading. I think there was a lot
of confusion in the 60s that that caused a lot of
reevaluation, both in the national planning
profession groups and on the planning schools,
that I think in many respects was perhaps healthy,
but in many ways a waste of time. I think certainly
in the late 70s for moving back more to,
I think, higher levels of scholarship,
with job prospects for graduating planners not
necessarily assured that they're going to find
what they're looking for in terms of the job
planning. Those that enter the planning
profession, I think, are going to tend to be more
dedicated, more sincere, rather than, as I'm
afraid some of the 60s were just looking for a
fabulous quick salary.
But I'm speaking from the outside of the
educational system now, but certainly
interviewing the planners, I get the sense that we
are beginning to see dedicated, qualified,
well-trained planners available.
Roscoe, thank you very much for your time and for
your thoughts. I must thank you on the part of the
Texas chapter of the American Planning
Association and for the Department of Urban and
Regional Planning at Texas A&M. Well, I
appreciate the opportunity to participate. I
think it's a marvelous program that you're
undertaking. And good luck in providing
additional information. Please call. We'll
probably be asking for some documents. Let me give
you here a listing of city planning publications
of the department, which I tried to go back beyond
the time that I came here and keep up to date. Not
only the formal publication, but a lot of the
informal publications that hopefully a goodly
number of these have gotten to the planning school
libraries and are certainly available here in the
department library. Mighty fine. This will be
very useful. Thank you.